WHAT IS ACHY FEET?

A feeling of pain experienced in the feet due to various reasons.

WHAT CAUSES ACHY FEET?

Injury,overuse or conditions causes inflammation involving any of the bones,ligaments or tendons in the foot can cause foot pain.
Injury to the nerves of the feet may result in intense burning pain,numbness or tingling (peripheral neuropathy)

REMEDY

1. Hot and Cold Water

Hot-and cold-water therapy can be effective in treating foot pain. The hot treatment will promote blood flow, and the cold treatment will
reduce inflammation.

Fill one bucket with cold water and another with bearable hot water. Sit in a comfortable chair, dip your feet in the hot water for three
minutes and then do the same with cold water for at least 10 seconds or up to a minute. Repeat the whole process two or three times and end
with cold foot bath.
Another option is to apply a heat pad and an ice pack alternately for 10 minutes to reduce pain.

2. Vinegar

Vinegar is used in various treatments and can help with foot pain due to sprains or strains as it reduces inflammation.

Fill a tub with hot water. Add two tablespoons of vinegar in it. You can also mix sea salt or Epsom salt in it. If you do not have any
of these, just use table salt. Soak your feet in it for about 20 minutes.
Alternatively, put a mixture of equal amounts of vinegar and water in two containers. Use cold water in one and hot water in the other.
Soak a towel in the hot mixture, squeeze out the excess liquid and then wrap it around your foot. Leave it wrapped for five minutes. Do the
same using the cold mixture. Repeat the whole process at least three or four times daily.

3. Epsom Salt

Epsom salt can help soothe your feet, giving you instant relief from foot pain. Combining heat and Epsom salt, which is primarily magnesium,
works well to relax the feet and ease pain.

Put two to three tablespoons of Epsom salt in a tub of warm water.
Soak your feet in the tub for 10 to 15 minutes.
The salt can make your feet dry, so apply some moisturizer after soaking them.

4. Ice

Ice therapy is a good way to reduce pain and swelling on the feet. Put a small amount of crushed ice in a small plastic bag and use it to
massage the affected area in a circular motion. You can also use a bag of frozen vegetables wrapped in a thin towel.

The cold temperature will temporarily numb the nerve endings in the painful area and give you relief. Swelling will also be reduced. Do not
use an ice pack for more than 10 minutes at a time; longer use can damage the skin and nerves.

5. Clove Oil

Clove oil is highly effective in treating headaches, joint pain, athlete’s foot, nail fungus and also foot pain as it boosts circulation.

For quick relief, gently massage your aching feet with clove oil. This will stimulate blood flow and relax your muscles. You can massage
your feet and heels with clove oil several times a day.
If you have sensitive skin or a cut, dilute three drops of clove oil with one teaspoon of extra virgin olive oil or coconut oil and then
massage your feet with it.

6. Cayenne Pepper

Cayenne pepper is a rich source of capsaicin, which is known to relieve muscle aches and pains, arthritis, muscle strain, lower back pain,
and even aching feet.

If your feet ache when they get cold, sprinkle some cayenne pepper in your socks before putting them on. This will help keep your feet warm.
Another treatment is to add one-half teaspoon of cayenne pepper powder to half a bucket of hot water and soak your feet in it for a few minutes.
This will have a soothing effect and give you relief from pain.

7. Sage

If your foot pain is due to some kind of strain, sprain, cut, or soreness, sage can be used to get relief from the discomfort.  It can also
reduce foot odor.

Gently rub a handful of sage leaves between your hands and then put them in a pot with a little less than one cup of apple cider vinegar.
Bring the mixture to a boil, then reduce the heat and let it simmer for five minutes.
Soak a cotton cloth in the warm solution and then hold it on the affected area.
Repeat the process several times.

8. Mustard Seeds

Mustard seeds can also be used in the treatment of foot pain. They help remove toxic water from the body, improve blood circulation and reduce
inflammation, thus giving relief from swelling and pain.

Grind some mustard seeds and add them to half a bucket of warm water.
Soak your feet in the water for 10 to 15 minutes and then pat dry your feet.

9. Asparagus

Asparagus is a good remedy when the foot pain is associated with some kind of inflammation or edema. Simply steam some asparagus for a few
minutes and then eat it. It will act as a natural diuretic, helping to flush excess fluid out of your system thereby reducing inflammation.

10. Essential Oils

Essential oils such as eucalyptus oil, peppermint oil and rosemary oil will help soothe tired, sore and aching feet.

Mix four drops each of eucalyptus oil and rosemary oil and two drops of peppermint oil in hot water.
Soak your feet in it for about 10 minutes.
Next time you suffer from foot pain, simply try any of these natural remedies. However, if the pain is unbearable and does not improve,
see your doctor.