WHAT IS ACNE?

Acne is a common skin disease characterized by pimples on the face, chest, and back. It occurs when the pores
of the skin become clogged with oil, dead skin cells, and bacteria.

WHAT CAUSES ACNE?

Four main factors cause acne: Oil production,dead skin cells,clogged pores,bacteria.
Acne typically appears on your face, neck, chest, back and shoulders. These areas of skin have the most oil (sebaceous)
glands. Acne occurs when hair follicles become plugged with oil and dead skin cells.

REMEDY

1. Tea Tree Oil

With its natural inflammation-fighting properties, a 5 percent solution of tea tree oil is less harsh than a 5 percent benzoyl peroxide solution and can be just as effective
against acne, though it may clear up a little less quickly. Mix a few drops of tea tree oil with between 20 and 40 drops of witch hazel, then use a cotton swab to apply. Try
this remedy up to twice a day; more could dry your skin and make the acne worse.

2. Green Tea

Green tea has antimicrobial and antioxidant compounds that can help fight acne. To get its effects, use a cooled cup of green tea as a face wash or lay the bag over the affected
area.

3. Honey

Honey’s antibiotic properties can help improve acne. Apply a teaspoon of honey to affected areas, or make a mask by mixing 1/2 cup of honey with 1 cup of plain oatmeal and
leaving it on for 30 minutes.

4. Mint

Mint can help remove pore-clogging oil. To help clear acne before it begins, mix 2 tablespoons of finely chopped fresh mint with two tablespoons each of plain yogurt and
oatmeal (use a blender to pulverize the oatmeal to powder). Leave the concoction on your face for 10 minutes, then rinse off with water.

5. Echinacea

Echinacea is traditionally used to speed wound healing and prevent colds and flu, but its antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties can help with acne as well. Use
echinacea tea as a daily face wash by soaking a cloth with it, or put a few drops of tincture on a cotton ball and dab it on blemishes.

6. Chamomile

Chamomile helps decrease inflammation from acne. In a blender or coffee grinder, combine the contents of a chamomile tea bag with enough water to form a paste, and apply that
to acne. Alternately, steep two chamomile tea bags with 1 cup boiled water for 15 minutes. Let the tea cool, then use a cotton ball to dab it on your face after cleansing.

8. Witch Hazel

Witch hazel can act as an astringent, naturally drying and shrinking blemishes. To get its benefits, pour witch hazel onto a cotton ball and wipe your face each morning and night.

9. Aloe vera

Aloe, known for its burn-relieving properties, can promote healing, fight infection, and even reduce scarring. Scrape the gel from an aloe plant out with a spoon, and apply
to acne. You can also buy aloe gel from health-food stores—just make sure it’s pure aloe, with no added ingredients.

10. Lemons

Lemons act as an exfoliant, skin lightener, and disinfectant to reduce the appearance of scars and prevent new pimples from forming. On a clean face, dab acne with a cotton ball
or cotton swab dipped in lemon juice, then rinse with cool water.

11. Apple cider vinegar

Apple cider vinegar contains malic and lactic acids that can exfoliate, reduce red marks, and treat acne. For a DIY toner, mix equal parts apple cider vinegar and water and apply
to skin with a cotton ball, making sure to shake well before each use.

12 Acidic foods

Acidic foods like citrus fruit juice or vinegar can flush pores. Dab a little onto a cotton ball to help battle acne; gently swipe the cotton on the affected areas.

13. Garlic

Garlic is an antiviral, antifungal, antiseptic and antioxidant agent that can help in the fast treatment of pimples. The sulfur in garlic also promotes quick healing of pimples.

Method

Cut a fresh garlic clove into two pieces.
Rub the garlic on the pimples and leave it for five minutes before washing the skin with lukewarm water.
Repeat the treatment several times a day.
Eating one raw garlic clove daily can also help purify your blood. But do not to eat too much raw garlic as it can upset the stomach.

14. Cinnamon and Honey Mask

Mix two tablespoons of raw honey, one teaspoon of coconut oil and 1/2 teaspoon of cinnamon. Smooth over face. Keep away from eyes, as the cinnamon can be an irritant.
Relax for 5–10 minutes and gently remove with damp cloth. Honey and cinnamon used together helps to fight acne because of its anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and antibacterial
properties.

Add a couple of drops of tea tree oil to either of the masks above during an active acne breakout. Tea tree oil is considered one of the best home remedies for acne.

15. Yogurt and Honey Mask

Mix one tablespoon of raw honey with one tablespoon of yogurt. Apply to face, paying particular attention to hairline, jawline and other
acne prone areas. Relax for 10 minutes and gently wipe off with a damp cloth.