WHAT ARE ALLERGIES AND SINUS?

Allergic Rhinitis,Sinusitis and Rhinosinusitis. Inflammation of the nasal mucous membrane is called
rhinitis. The symptoms include sneezing and runny and/or itchy nose,caused by irritation and congestion
in the nose.

WHAT CAUSES ALLERGIES AND SINUS?

Sinusitis is an inflammation of the sinuses. It is often caused by bacterial(germ) infection. Sometimes,
viruses and fungi (molds) cause it. People weak immune systems are likely to develop bacterial or
fungal sinusitis. Some people with allergies can have "allergic fungal sinusitis."

REMEDY

1. Flush your nasal passages.

“There is a lot of debate about which sinus pain remedies work and what has been proven, but saline
spray and washes like the neti pot are indisputable,” says Spencer C. Payne, MD, an associate professor
of otolaryngology – head and neck surgery at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. A saline
wash thins mucus and helps flush it out of the nasal passages. “Saline washes have been studied and
proven to be effective, and should be the first line of defense against sinusitis,” Dr. Payne says.
If you have sinus problems, Payne recommends daily use of a saline solution via the neti pot or other
device to keep the sinuses moist, and to double up when you are fighting a cold or allergies.

2. Try bromelain.

Sold as a supplement, bromelain is a protein found in pineapple stems. For years, it's been used by
prize fighters to reduce swelling. “Bromelain appears to be beneficial and helps reduce swelling in
the nasal passages,” says Robert Graham, MD, MPH, an internist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City
and assistant professor at the Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine. Just be sure to talk to
your doctor first, because bromelain may interact with other medications you’re taking. And be sure
follow exact dosing instructions.

3. Steam.

Hot water vapor can help moisten the sinuses. “Sprinkle a few drops of eucalyptus or menthol in the
shower and steam up your bathroom,” Dr. Graham suggests. “A hot, steamy shower or bath can also help
to loosen up mucus and debris that is stuck inside your nose,” says Sam S. Rizk, MD, a New York City-based
ear, nose, and throat doctor and facial plastic surgeon.

4. Drink up.

Staying hydrated helps your body in many ways, including keeping your sinuses moist. Drink water throughout
the day, and make sure to steer clear of caffeinated or alcoholic drinks, which can cause dehydration,
Graham says. Although recommended fluid intake differs from person to person, an easy guideline is to
drink at least eight 8-ounce glasses a day. How can you tell if you are getting enough fluids? “If
the color of your urine is clear, you are hydrated,” Graham says.

5. Spices

Spicy foods such as mustard, hot peppers, curry, horseradish, and wasabi may help clear sinuses, Graham
says. If you like spice, consider adding some “hot” spices to your meals to open your nasal passages.

6. Allergy-proof your home.

Allergies can make sinus pain worse. The latest guidelines from the American Academy of
Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery call for controlling your home environment by getting rid of
dust mites, installing an air filter system, using bedding with allergen-barriers, and keeping any pets
out of the bedroom to help curb nasal allergies.

7. Use a humidifier.

A humidifier can keep the air moist, but be sure to keep it clean, especially if you have mold allergies,
says Satish Govindaraj, MD, an associate professor of otolaryngology and neurosurgery at Mount Sinai
Hospital in New York City. A dirty humidifier can breed mold. And you should only use a humidifier
during dry months, not when it’s humid. In addition, keep an eye on the humidity level in the room,
Payne adds. “Thirty-five to 50 percent humidity is ideal," he says. "If you start fogging the windows,
the humidity level is too high.”

8. Apply warm compresses.

“You can use a warm compress to help keep the nasal tissues moist," Dr. Rizk says. "Or, fill a deep
bowl or pot with steaming water and place your face over it with a towel around your head to breathe
the steam in.” Just be careful not to burn yourself. You can also follow up the warm compress with a
cold compress, which may help relieve sinus pain.

9. Don’t ask for antibiotics right away.

Using antibiotics indiscriminately can lead to antibiotic resistance and the development of superbugs,
plus they may not be effective in treating most cases of sinusitis. "Less than two percent of these
infections are bacterial," Payne says. "Most are viral and should be treated without antibiotics."
So-called "watchful waiting" may be indicated, the American Academy of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck
Surgery guidelines state. Your doctor may suggest a seven-day waiting period without antibiotics to see
if you get better on your own. In fact, according to a study published in JAMA in 2012, for acute
cases of sinusitis, antibiotics did little to reduce symptoms at three days of treatment and only
provided small benefits at day seven. Quality of life improved over the 10-day treatment in patients
receiving both placebo and the antibiotic.Know when to see the doctor. “If the sinus pain does not
improve with over-the-counter help, your doctor can perform a CT scan of the nose and sinuses to look
for anatomical blockages that can be treated surgically, such as a deviated nasal septum or nasal
polyps,” Rizk says. If sinus pain lasts for a week or more and you have a fever, you should see an ear,
nose and throat specialist, because you may need more aggressive treatment than natural remedies provide.

10. Apple Cider Vinegar

Apple cider vinegar is an age old remedy that is often recommended for a variety of health conditions.
I’ve personally used it for allergy relief (and heartburn relief) with great success. The theory is
that its ability to reduce mucous production and cleanse the lymphatic system makes it useful for
allergies. It is also said to help digestion, weight loss and more so it is worth a try!

11. Nettle Leaf

Nettle leaf is another natural antihistamine that can be very effective as it naturally blocks the
body’s ability to produce histamine. It grows in many places and can be made in to a tincture or tea,
but for allergy relief, capsules made from dried nettle leaves are the easiest and most effective option.
Nettle leaf can also be used in combination with other herbs to make a soothing herbal tea for allergy
relief. It is often mixed with peppermint leaf and sometimes red raspberry leaf to make a refreshing
allergy relief tea.

12. Local Honey

There isn’t much scientific evidence to back this one, but there seems to be a lot of anecdotal
evidence from people who have tried it. (Even Mark Sisson weighed in on the subject here). The theory
is that consuming local honey from where you live will help your body adapt to the allergens in the
environment there. This is supposed to work like a natural allergy “shot” and doesn’t seem to have
a downside.