WHAT IS ANXIETY?

It is the feeling of fear or panic. Most people feel anxious, panicky or fearful about situations in
life, such as money problems or exams but often once the difficult situation is over you feel better
and calmer.

WHAT CAUSES ANXIETY?

The exact cause of anxiety disorder is unknown, but anxiety disorders, like other forms of mental
illness, are not the result of personal weakness, a character flaw , or poor upbringing. As scientists
continue their research on mental illness, it is becoming clear that many of these disorders are caused
by a combination of factors, including changes in the brain and environmental stress.

REMEDY

1. Chamomile

Chamomile helps calm you down and relieves anxiety. According to a 2009 study published in the Journal
of Clinical Psychopharmacology, chamomile (Matricaria retutica) may help reduce anxiety symptoms in
those suffering from mild to moderate Generalized Anxiety Disorder. It also promotes relaxation and
drowsiness due to its mild sedative affect.

Steep two to three teaspoons of dried chamomile, preferably German chamomile, in a cup of hot water
for three to five minutes. Strain it and, if you wish, add honey and cinnamon to it. Drink this tea
a few times a day for about one month or until you see improvement.
Alternatively, take this herb in supplement form. Consult your doctor for proper dosage. Adults can
generally take 400 to 1600 mg capsules in divided doses daily, or one to four ml of liquid extract
three times a day.

2. Oranges

The uplifting smell of oranges and orange peels helps calm the nerves. Moreover, citrus fragrances are
believed to help fight depression and boost immunity.

Simply peeling an orange and inhaling its aroma can help uplift your mood. For better results, put a
few orange peels in a pan of water and allow it to simmer. Inhale the refreshing smell to do away with
your anxiety. Repeat as needed.
You can also drink one cup of fresh orange juice mixed with one teaspoon of honey and a pinch of nutmeg
powder. Drink it daily for a few days or weeks.

3. Rosemary

Rosemary is another popular home remedy for anxiety due to its calming effect. Furthermore, it stimulates
circulation, relaxes the respiratory and digestive muscles, and has a positive effect on memory and
alertness.

Add one or two teaspoons of dried rosemary to one cup of hot water. Let it steep for about 10 minutes,
and then strain it. Drink this tea daily until you are satisfied with the results.
You can also use rosemary incense or add a few drops of rosemary essential oil in an aromatherapy
diffuser or vaporizer.

4. Lavender

Lavender induces relaxation and relieves depression. It has a calming and soothing effect on the
nervous system due to its bioactive constituents such as linalool and linalyl acetate.Studies also
indicate that it may be helpful in reducing anxiety, but further research is needed to draw conclusions
about clinical anxiety disorders.

Boil two cups of water, add two to four drops of lavender essential oil to it, and inhale the steam
to ease anxiety. Repeat as needed.Alternatively, mix three or four drops of lavender oil in one teaspoon
of almond oil, olive oil or any base oil. Use it as a massage oil on your neck, back and shoulders.
Repeat daily or a few times a week until your condition improves.

5. Nutmeg

Nutmeg is an aromatic spice that promotes relaxation, fights depression and works as a muscle relaxant.
Hence, it is great for treating anxiety, stress and depression. It is also believed to help improve
sleep quality.

Simply inhale the smell of nutmeg oil to uplift your mood and reduce brain exhaustion. You can also
add one-quarter teaspoon of nutmeg powder in your food on a regular basis.

Note: Excessive use of nutmeg is not recommended, especially for those who have psychiatric conditions.

6. Lemon Balm

Lemon balm, a member of the mint family, works as a mild relaxant and nerve tonic. Hence, it has been
used for ages to reduce anxiety, promote sleep and improve appetite. You can combine it with valerian,
green tea, lavender, catnip or other herbs.

Steep one teaspoon of dried lemon balm in hot water for 10 to 15 minutes. Make sure the tea pot is
covered so that the aromatic oils do not escape. Drink a cup of this tea before going to bed for a
couple of weeks. Do not take it for more than two weeks at a time.
Alternatively, take this herb in supplement form. Generally, it is suggested to take 400 mg capsules
twice daily. Consult your doctor for the proper dosage to meet your needs.

Note: Do not use this herb in excess; it may make you more anxious.

7. Almonds

Almonds are loaded with nutrients, especially omega-3 fatty acids that improve your mood and help
alleviate anxiety and depression. The anti-inflammatory omega-3 fatty acids fight cellular inflammation
that causes a breakdown in signaling between brain cells.

Soak 10 almonds in water overnight.
The next morning, peel off the skin and grind the almonds.
Add this paste and a pinch of nutmeg and ginger to one cup of milk.
Drink it daily or a few times a week until you see improvement.

8. Fennel

This wonderful herb calms the nerves and helps ease anxiety. It contains volatile oils that have an
anxiolytic (anxiety-relieving) effect. Also, it reduces gastrointestinal symptoms that often accompany
anxiety.

Put a few drops of fennel essential oil on a tissue and inhale the smell, off and on, for about one
hour. Repeat every few hours, as needed. You can also drink fennel tea on a regular basis, before or
after meals. Fennel juice will also help.

9. Relaxing Bath

Hot water baths have relaxing properties that provide relief from anxiety and stress. Furthermore,
water is considered excellent for cleansing the aura.

Mix one-third cup each of baking soda and ginger in a bathtub filled with warm water. Soak in it for
10 to 15 minutes.
Alternatively, you can add five to seven drops of an aromatherapy essential oil like chamomile, lavender,
ylang ylang, geranium or bergamot, along with an ounce of carrier oil like jojoba oil, to your bath
water. Soak in it for 15 to 20 minutes.
Repeat either of these remedies as needed.

10. Massage

Massaging your body, especially your neck, shoulders, back and the bottoms of your feet, can help a
great deal in relaxing your body and relieving anxiety.
You can use any massage oil or sesame, sunflower, coconut or corn oil for this purpose. For best
results, use six or seven ounces of the oil of your choice after heating it slightly.
Massage daily before taking your morning bath or at night before going to bed. Continue for a few weeks,
or include it in your daily routine if you are prone to anxiety.
Along with these natural remedies, reduce and control anxiety by following some preventive measures
like not smoking and restricting the amount of caffeinated beverages that you drink.
Instead, improve your lifestyle by incorporating a regular exercise and sleep routine, improving your
diet and turning to yoga or relaxation techniques, such as deep breathing, meditation, visualization
and music therapy.If you experience intense anxiety or are suffering from an anxiety-related disorder,
consult an expert for proper diagnosis and treatment.