WHAT IS ARTHRITIS?

This is the painful inflammation and stiffness of the joints.

WHAT CAUSES ARTHRITIS?

An infection or injury to the joints can exacerbate this natural breakdown of cartilage tissue. Your
risk of developing OA may be higher if you have family history of the disease. Another common form of
arthritis, RA is autoimmune disorder. It occurs when your body's immune system attacks the tissue of
the body.

REMEDY

1. Turmeric & Ginger Tea

Turmeric and ginger are both anti-inflammatorys, and will help with oseto and rheumatoid arthritis.
Turmeric in particular has gotten a lot of attention lately. Its active ingredient is something called
curcumin, which is a powerful antioxidant. In addition, it lowers the levels of 2 enzymes responsible
for causing inflammation (which is what we’re often fighting with arthritis.) You can take these in
a capsule form or make a nice spicy tea to enjoy daily.

You will need…

-2 cups of water
-1/2 teaspoon ground ginger
-1/2 teaspoon ground turmeric
-Honey to taste

Directions

Bring 2 cups of water to a boil, and had ½ teaspoon each ground ginger and ground turmeric. Reduce to
a simmer and let it be for 10-15 minutes. Strain, add honey to taste, and enjoy twice daily. This
yields 2 servings.

2. Epsom salt soak

Epsom salt contains magnesium sulfate which sounds kind of scary, but it’s really quite a wonderful
substance. A naturally occurring mineral, magnesium sulfate has been used to get relief from pain for
years, namely because of its high levels of magnesium (more on magnesium below.)

You will need…

-1/2 cup of Epsom salt
-A large bowl
-Warm water

Directions

Fill a large bowl with warm water and add ½ cup of Epsom salt. Stir it around, and then submerge your
sore joints in the liquid. If you are experiencing pain in a less convenient place to soak, such as
your knees, try taking a bath with Epsom salts. Run a tub full of warm water and add 2 cups of Epsom
salt. Soak for 15 minutes (at least.)

3. Get more magnesium

Magnesium is something our bodies need, but we can’t make it ourselves. It is used in over 300 different
biomechanical responses in our body. It relaxes all our muscles and nerve endings, relieving stiffness
and pain. It is even part of what makes our heart beat. Not only does it relax muscles and ease pain
(this goes for arthritis pain too, of course) it helps bones to mineralize. The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition conducted one of many studies on magnesium that showed people who had a diet high
in magnesium/took supplements had higher bone density, and overall stronger bones. There are several
ways to get more magnesium and utilize it for arthritis in particular.

magnesium supplements

Supplements: Magnesium capsules are a good thing to add to your day-to-day life, but they work best
when used in conjunction with an improved diet.
Diet: Really this is the clincher-as great as supplements are, they can’t do everything. Eat foods
that are high in magnesium, which include dark leafy greens (like spinach), nuts, and legumes (beans.)
Oil: There is magnesium oil that can be applied topically and absorbed through the skin. Try rubbing
it on sore joints to relieve pain.

4. Lubricate With Extra Virgin Olive Oil

The very consistency of olive oil makes it seem like something that would lubricate your joints and
ease arthritis pain, and it turns out, it actually does. A main compound in extra virgin olive oil
(EVOO) called oleocanthal inhibits inflammatory enzymes COX-1 and COX-2, just like Advil or aspirin
does. The study showed that 1 ½ tablespoons is equal to 200-mg of ibuprofen. However, not every oil
is created equal. Heat destroys oleocanthal, so it is necessary to use extra virgin olive oil or
“cold-pressed.” The ripeness of the olives at the time they were pressed also determines the level of
oleocanthal-generally the stronger tasting the oil, the higher the level there is present. It can be
taken internally to reap the benefits, but being high in calories consider replacing any fats, such
as butter, with it in cooking instead.

You will need…

-2-3 tablespoons of extra virgin olive oil

Directions

Rub a bit of olive oil onto your sore joints twice a day, massaging in to each one gently. You can
also take 2-3 tablespoons daily, but be sure to give up some other form of fat due to the high calorie
count in the oil (rest easy, these are good calories.)

5. Dandelion Leaves

Incredibly high in vitamins A and C, dandelion leaves can help repair damaged tissue and help the liver
clear toxins out of the blood. Studies, although limited, have also shown anti-inflammatory properties
due to the linoleic and linoleic acid in them. Linoleic is an essential fatty acid required by the
body to produce prostaglandin-which basically regulates immune responses and suppresses inflammation.
Because of its involvement with immune responses, dandelion shows great potential when it comes to
treating rheumatoid arthritis in particular. You can enjoy dandelion leaves in nice salad, or brew
tea with them.

You will need…

-3 teaspoons of fresh dandelion leaves, or 1 teaspoon of dried
-1 cup of boiling water
-A handful of fresh leaves (if making a salad)
-A dash of extra virgin olive oil (if making a salad)

Directions

For fresh dandelion tea, step 3 teaspoons of fresh leaves or 1 teaspoon dried in 1 cup of boiling water.
Strain and drink twice daily. Dandelion tea is very bitter…you have been warned! You can add honey to
sweeten it up if you’d like. To make a salad, simply toss the greens in with another recipe, or eat
them plain with a bit of extra virgin olive oil. Older leaves can be gently sautéed to soften them up
a bit.

6. Blackstrap Molasses Drink

High in valuable minerals such as calcium, potassium, and magnesium, blackstrap molasses has been a
cherished home remedy for arthritis for a number of years. Blackstrap molasses is what remains after
the 3rd boiling of sugar syrup, and is nothing like the nutrient lacking refined sugars used today.
As a dietary supplement (easily consumed as a drink) blackstrap can help relieve symptoms of arthritis
and joint pain, thanks to its vital constituents that regulate nerve and muscle function, and strengthen
bones.

You will need…

-1 tablespoon of blackstrap molasses
-1 cup of warm water

Directions

Heat 1 cup of fresh water until warm, but not hot. Stir in a tablespoon of blackstrap molasses and
drink once daily. Do note that it can sometimes have a laxative effect.

7. White Willow Tea (the original aspirin)

Before there was aspirin, and I mean way before aspirin, there was white willow bark. The Greek physician
Hippocrates wrote about it all the way back in 5th century BC. It wasn’t until 18-something or other
(1829, I believe) that it was found that white willow was so effective because it contained an active
ingredient called salicin. Salicin is converted in the body into salicylic acid-similar to acetyl
salicylic acid, the active ingredient in aspirin. But because the naturally occurring salicin is
converted after it passed through the stomach, it resulted in less irritation/side effects. While it
can be taken in a capsule form, I usually opt for the tea version of just about everything.

You will need…

-2 teaspoons of powdered or chipped white willow bark
-1 cup of water
-Honey or lemon to taste

Directions

Bring 1 cup (8 oz.) of water to a boil, then reduce to a simmer. Add 2 teaspoons of powdered or chipped
white willow bark and let it infuse for 10-15 minutes. Remove from heat and let it steep for 30 more
minutes. Drink twice daily-it’s bitter, so honey and lemon are usually welcome here.

8. Exercise

When it’s painful and difficult just to move, the last thing you feel like doing is getting up and
exercising. As unpleasant as it may sound though, exercise is vital for those who suffer from any
form of stiffness, joint pain, or arthritis. Exercise will help control weight (an excess of which
puts more strain on your joints) strengthens the muscles that support the joint, even when the cartilage
is thinning, and lubricates the joints, allowing them to move more freely. When we are inactive the
synovial fluid in the joints is the consistency of a thick gel, but once we get moving and warming up,
the liquid becomes more viscous and can do a better job of lubricating our joints and keeping them going
smoothly. Just imagine if you were to be sedentary every day, pretty soon you’d be so stiff it’d be just
about impossible to move. But if you get up and move around every day, you’ll get stronger and will
loosen up as well.

Try…

-Going for a brisk walk-start with 15 minutes and work your way up into a solid daily routine.
-Doing joint-targeted exercises-certain stretches and exercises specifically target joints to help
 rid them of stiffness and pain.
-Getting a dog-doing so backs up the first point, because you’ll have no choice but to walk!

9. Peppermint Eucalyptus Oil Blend

Peppermint and eucalyptus don’t change the course of the arthritis itself, but they do have analgesic,
or pain-relieving, properties. The cooling sensation that they produce can temporarily override your
discomfort, and create a soothing sensation that can ease the pain of arthritis.

You will need…

-5-10 drops of Peppermint oil
-5-10 drops of Eucalyptus oil
-1-2 tablespoons of carrier oil (olive, almond, grape seed, etc.)
-A small dark glass bottle

Directions

Blend 5-10 drops of eucalyptus and peppermint oil together, and then mix into 1-2 tablespoons of
carrier oil. Carrier oil is needed to dilute the essential oil so that it does not irritate the skin,
and can be olive oil, grapeseed oil, or something of the like (not oil.) Store the oil blend in dark
glass bottle away from direct sunlight, and rub into your joints when they ache.

10. Juniper Berry Tea

A 2009 research trial published in the “Journal of Ethnopharmacology” found that juniper berries do
indeed help with arthritis pain thanks to a component called terpinen-4-ol. Terpene suppresses a type
of white blood cells called monocytes which, as a part of our immune system, respond to signals of
inflammation. In rheumatoid arthritis, the immune system attacks normal joint tissue for no reason,
leading to inflammation, pain, and loss of function. If taken daily, juniper may be able to reduce the
uncomfortable inflammation thanks to its terpene content. Only prickly juniper and common juniper
varieties were effective.

Note: Do NOT drink juniper berry tea while pregnant.

You will need…

-1 tablespoon of dried juniper berries
-1 cup of fresh water
-Honey (optional)

Directions

Bring 1 cup of fresh water to a boil, and place 1 tablespoon of dried juniper berries in a mug. Pour
the boiling water over the berries and let them steep for 20 minutes before straining. Drink 1 cup
twice daily, and add honey to taste if you like.

11. Golden Raisins & Gin

First off I am not recommending that you go and drink gin, but I thought this was an interesting old
home remedy for arthritis. Gins flavor is derived from juniper berries (see #11 for a more in depth
explanation of juniper berries) which contain anti-inflammatory properties. Golden raisins (only golden
can be used in this recipe) require sulfides in their processing to give them their characteristic
color. Sulfides are found in both glucosamine and chondroitin, which many people have found to be
helpful remedies for arthritis. This remedy stretches back at least 20 years, and some people swear
by it, while others have had limited success.

You will need…

-Around 1/2 cup of gin
-1 cup of golden raisins
-a shallow dish

Directions

The amounts will vary depending on how big of a batch you are making, but basically you just need
raisins and enough gin to just cover them, and the above amounts are just to give a general guideline.
I am one of those people who, even if it is a loosely interpreted recipe, like to have some numbers to
start with. Anyways, place 1 cup of golden raisins in a shallow dish, and pour in enough gin to just
barely cover them. Cover with a towel and store them away in a dark place until the gin has evaporated
(around 2 weeks.) Eat 9 of the raisins daily, keeping in mind the results may take several weeks to show.

12. Bosweilla supplements

Also known as Frankincense, Bosweilla is a flowering plant native to Africa and Asia. The gum resin
or extract of the plant works as an anti-inflammatory and pain-killer. It works against inflammation
by ‘disabling’ white blood cells that would cause swelling, and also helps shrink tissue that has
already become inflamed and painful. I am afraid I don’t have a tea recipe for this one, as it is
generally taken in a tablet supplement form, much like a vitamin. It is sold at many health stores
and online, and is fairly reasonably priced compared to what some other supplements cost.

13. Pectin & Grape Juice

Pectin is a water soluble carbohydrate substance found in the cell walls of plants, where it helps
keep cell walls together, and gives fruit firmness as it ripens. It is extracted from fruit to use as
a setting in jams and jellies, and has become popular as a home remedy for arthritis when combined
with grape juice. It has been tentatively hypothesized that it helps return the synovial tissue to
a more elastic and lubricated state, which results in pain-free movement. Despite the fact that more
studies are needed on pectin and connective tissue many people have found, for whatever reason, great
relief from their arthritis with it. The grape juice is the liquid of choice due to the fact that it
can help with inflammation.

You will need…

-1 tablespoon of liquid pectin
-8 oz. of grape juice

Directions

Mix 1 tablespoon of liquid pectin with 8 oz. of grape juice and drink 1-2 times daily. It will take
a week or two for the effects to show.

14. Cayenne ‘Capsaicin’ Ointment

A common OTC pain reliever for joint pain contains capsaicin, a component in hot peppers that inhibits
something called Substance P. Substance P is involved in transmitting pain signals to our brain, and
when the capsaicin interferes with it, it minimizes the alert to the discomfort, and therefore the
discomfort itself. It has been one of the more effective topical treatments for arthritis, and you
can make your own at home with humble cayenne. Keep in mind, however, that it is only a temporary fix
and should be used sparingly if possible.