WHAT IS ATHLETE'S FOOT?

This is a fungal infection that affects the skin on the feet. It can also spread to the toenails or
the hands. It is contagious.

WHAT CAUSES ATHLETE'S FOOT?

It occurs when the tinea fungus grows on the feet. You can catch the fungus through direct contact
with an infected person or by touching surfaces contaminated with the fungus. The fungus thrives in
warm, moist environments and is commonly found in showers, on lockers floors and around swimming pools.

REMEDY

Add 40 Drops of Organic Tea Tree Oil to a foot bath and soak your feet for 10 minutes. After soaking
and thoroughly drying the feet, massage a few drops of the oil directly into the affected area.
Tea tree oil has properties that will help destroy the fungus in heavily infested areas and deter it
from spreading to unaffected areas.

Soak your feet in 2 tablespoons of Himalayan Crystal salt and ½ cup Organic Apple Cider Vinegar solution
mixed with some warm water. This creates a very acidic environment in which the fungus cannot live.
You can also spray your feet or wipe them down with a cloth soaked in this solution after you shower,
just make sure you get them completely dry afterwards. You can also wipe down the insides of shoes and
sandals to help prevent the fungus from clinging there.

Make your feet stinkier by placing slices of fresh garlic, or some crushed garlic, between your toes
and leaving them there for the day. You can also add the garlic to foods you eat or take a garlic
supplement with the same effect, it just may take a little bit longer.

Using ozonated olive oil can also help with Athlete’s Foot. Use the paste to swab your clean, dry feet
each morning and night. This should clear up the fungus within about two to four days and can be used
as a preventative measure against future outbreaks. I recommend the olive oil paste such as O2-Zap®.

Sprinkle your toes with a little bit of organic corn starch or baking soda before putting on your socks
in the morning. The corn starch/baking soda will help soak up moisture, but it won’t stop the itch.
Baking soda in the shoes also helps to absorb some of that not-so-pleasant sweaty foot smell.

Make a tea of 4 ounces of oregano leaves and just enough water to cover your feet. Soak your feet 2-3
times daily in this mixture. I’ve read that you can re-use this tea for a week, but I strongly recommend
making it fresh each day so that you know you are starting out with fungus-free tea.

Sesame and Raw virgin coconut oil have anti-fungal properties and can be applied directly to the feet.
Swab it liberally on clean dry feet with a cotton ball twice daily.

Colloidal Silver is another common remedy for athlete’s foot. Spray or apply to your feet and let it
fully dry. Alternatively, you can spray and leave the silver on your feet overnight.

Organic Neem oil, sometimes used as a pesticide, is another all natural oil that is toxic to harmful
organisms. Apply to clean dry feet with a cotton ball before going about your business.

You can also use Organic Ginger, just an ounce of fresh chopped ginger added to a cup of boiling water
and simmered for 20 minutes. Once cooled, apply twice daily to clean feet. Ginger is a strong anti-fungal,
and your feet will have a pleasantly spicy smell.