WHAT IS BAD BREATH?

An unpleasant-smelling breath; halitosis.

WHAT CAUSES BAD BREATH?

If you don't brush and floss teeth daily, food particles can remain in your mouth, promoting bacterial
growth between teeth, around the gums an don the tongue. This causes bad breath. Antibacterial mouth
rinses also can help reduce bacteria. Some other causes are smoking, Respiratory infections, Acid
reflux.

REMEDY

The easiest method is to pop a few pieces of cloves into your mouth and chew them thoroughly. This will eliminate bad breath in a few minutes.
You can also make clove tea. Boil  a cup of water, add one teaspoon of ground cloves and allow it to simmer for 5 to 10 minutes. Drink the tea or use it as a mouthwash twice a day.

1. Parsley

Parsley contains chlorophyll that can help neutralize bad breath.

Simply chew on a fresh parsley sprig to refresh your breath. You can also dip this herb in vinegar and then chew it thoroughly.
Another option is to put parsley leaves through a juicer and sip the juice anytime you need to refresh your breath. It will also aid digestion.

2. Lemon Juice

Curing bad breath with a lemon rinse has been used for generations. The acidic content in lemons prevents growth of bacteria in your mouth. Plus, its strong pleasant smell helps mask the bad odor.

Just stir one tablespoon of lemon juice into a cup of water and rinse your mouth with it. You can also add a bit of salt to it and then use it. This remedy will help to solve the problem of dry mouth
which is one of the main reasons that contribute to bad breath.

3. Apple Cider Vinegar

Due to its pH balancing effects, apple cider vinegar makes a wonderful remedy for bad breath. You can try any of these remedies depending on your preference.

Stir one tablespoon of raw, unfiltered apple cider vinegar into a glass of water and drink it before eating your meals. The vinegar will help in digestion as well as cure bad breath.
Gargle with apple cider vinegar mixed in a cup of water.

4. Baking Soda

Baking soda, also known as bicarbonate of soda, is another great solution for getting rid of and preventing bad breath. It helps balance the levels of acid that contribute to bad breath. Plus, it fights oral bacteria that cause bad breath.

Mix one-half teaspoon of baking soda in a glass of warm water and use it as a mouth rinse once daily until you are satisfied with the results.
Brushing your teeth with baking soda will also help reduce the acidity in your mouth and prevent bacteria from building up on your tongue.

5. Tea Tree Oil

Tea tree oil has antiseptic properties that act like a powerful disinfectant for your mouth. You can get the benefits from tea tree oil in a variety of ways.

Brush your teeth with a toothpaste containing tea tree oil.
Another option is to put a few drops of tea tree oil on your toothbrush along with your regular toothpaste.
You can also mix a few drops of tea tree oil, peppermint oil and lemon oil in a glass of water and use it as a mouthwash.

6. Tea

Normal as well as herbal teas can also help combat bad breath. The antioxidant polyphenols present in both green and black tea can stop the growth of bacteria responsible for bad breath.
You can also opt for an herbal tea like sage tea. To make this tea, steep one teaspoon of dried sage in a cup of hot water for five minutes. Strain and drink this tea several times a day to keep your breath fresh.

If your bad breath persists even after trying these natural treatments, consult a doctor or dentist to see if there is a more serious underlying problem.