WHAT IS BLISTERS?

A small bubble on the skin filled with serum and caused by friction, burning or other damage.

WHAT CAUSES BLISTERS?

Blisters are most often caused by skin being damaged by friction or heat. Certain medical conditions
also cause blisters to appear. The damaged upper layer of skin(epidermis) tears away from the layers
beneath and fluid(serum) collects in the space to create a blister.

REMEDY

1. Deodorant

Blisters are worsened by moisture and friction, so keeping your feet bone dry can help prevent them from forming. Slide the gel variety around the sides and tops of clean, dry feet before slipping on a new pair of shoes; the deodorant should act as a home remedy to lubricate any problem areas and reduce rubbing.

2. Tent it

Bandages reduce friction and protect your blister from irritating contact, but how you apply them can affect how your blister heals. Make a mini "tent" by applying the sticky ends of the bandage closer together, with the middle padded part rising slightly over your blister. This home remedy allows the blister to breathe, promoting healing while also protecting it from friction, or dirt and debris that could cause infection.

3. Soak in green tea

Green tea has anti-inflammatory properties that aid healing. First, brew three tea bags in boiling water, then toss in a teaspoon of baking soda (for its antiseptic properties). Allow the brew to cool, then soak your blister in it. You can use gauze to apply the home remedy to the area if the blister is in an area too difficult to soak. Also, if your blister hasn't popped, you can speed up the healing process by soaking it in warm water to help it soften up and drain the fluid inside.

4. Apple cider vinegar

Careful, this one may sting! But it's worth a try, as apple cider vinegar has antibacterial properties that will help prevent a popped blister from becoming infected. If the vinegar home remedy is too painful, try washing the area with hydrogen peroxide and covering with an antibacterial ointment.

5. Vitamin E

Vitamin E has excellent skin repairing properties, as it helps skin cells heal quickly and prevents scarring. You can purchase vitamin E oil or creams, or pop open a vitamin E pill and apply the liquid directly to your blistered skin.

6. Apply castor oil
Castor oil is a popular home remedy for blisters. What to do: Apply before you go to bed, and let sit overnight to help your blister dry up and heal. You can mix the castor oil with apple cider vinegar to further aid healing.

7. Dab on witch hazel

Witch hazel contains astringent tannins that will help to dry out your blister, keeping it clean and helping it heal. Use a clean cotton ball with each application.

8. Apply aloe vera gel

Aloe is an anti-inflammatory, so it will help reduce redness and swelling that cause pain. Studies have also proven that aloe is as effective as traditional medicines in healing second- and third-degree burns, making it an excellent home remedy for blisters.

9. Let it breathe

Many doctors agree that a blister will heal quicker if it is left uncovered in a clean environment. Remove bandages when you're at home so your blister has a chance to breathe and dry up. To protect it from infection, apply a thin layer of antibacterial ointment to promote healing.