WHAT IS BRITTLE TEETH?

It is a fairly common condition in which teeth lose their strength and break easily. They could crumble,
crack or fall out without much impact or reason. Different causes trigger brittleness of the teeth.
With good care and healthy eating habits, the condition of brittle teeth can be averted to a large
extent.

WHAT CAUSES BRITTLE TEETH?

Some of its causes are genetic factors where weak teeth are sometimes passed down the generations of
a family.

Dietary habits:

Eating too many sugary and acidic foods weakens teeth and causes them to become brittle. Frequent
snacking is also not advisable because the PH level of saliva does ot come to its normal levels
because of continuous intake of food.

Involuntary conditions:

Some people involuntarily grind or clench their teeth when they sleep or become emotional. When
grinding happens, the outer layer or enamel covering teeth is damaged.

Medical conditions:

Certain diseases, not necessarily of dental origin, lead to brittle teeth. Some of the common diseases
are periodontal diseases and some renal diseases.

Drugs:

Certain kinds of drugs cause brittleness in bones because of the various side effects they cause like
reducing calcium absorption in the body or contain high levels of flouride.

Aging(debatable)

REMEDY

You can fight brittle teeth by following a few simple methods.

1 .Do not brush teeth with a lot of force or too frequently. Brush twice a day and use circular movements of the brush for brushing. Wrong brushing strips enamel off teeth.

2. Chew a garlic clove. The antioxidants and medicinal enzymes in garlic strengthen teeth and gums.

3. Do not let your oral cavity dry. Drink lots of water to keep teeth hydrated.

4. Do not brush teeth immediately after drinking coffee, dry, aerated drinks, acidic juices and sweets. These foods soften the external layer of teeth and brushing immediately after consumption leads to damage.

5. Gargle mouth with warm water after eating so that enzymes present in foods are washed off.

6. Eat and drink foods that are rich in nutrients such as calcium and vitamins. Dairy products, green veggies and fruits should always be a part of diet. Calcium supplements in the form of pills are not as effective. Natural intake of calcium through foods is essential.

7. Avoid chilled food or beverages. Always eat freshly prepared hot food.

8. Visit a dentist at regular intervals and seek treatment when required.

9. Brittle teeth are sometimes an indication of more serious underlying problems such as thyroid dysfunction. The condition should be never ignored. Immediate consultation with a dentist and treatment are necessary.