WHAT IS CALLUSES AND CORN?

These are thick, hardened layers of skin that develop when your skin tries to protect itself against
friction and pressure. They most often develop on the feet and toes or hands and fingers. Corns and
calluses can be unsightly.

WHAT CAUSES CALLUSES AND CORN?

They are caused by repeated pressure or friction on an area of skin. the pressure or friction on an
area of skin. The pressure causes the skin to die and form a hard, protective surface. A soft corn
is formed in the same way, except that when sweat is trapped where the corn develops, the hand softens.
This typically occurs between toes.

REMEDY

1. Castor Oil and Apple Cider Vinegar

Fill a basin with hot, soapy water, then add a cup of apple cider vinegar before soaking your feet in the water for at least 15 minutes. Calluses should be softened enough to be filed with a pumice stone. For corns, dab some castor oil on after soaking your feet. Corns should peel away after about 10 days of the treatment.

2. Vitamin E or A

Before bed, use a needle to prick a vitamin E or A capsule, then rub the oil into your corn. After letting the oil sit for a few minutes, put on a white cotton sock and head to bed. Repeat nightly until the corn is gone.

3. Lemon

Before going to sleep, cut a slice of lemon peel about an inch long and the width of your toe. Place the pith over the corn, securing with a bandage and covering with a white cotton sock overnight. Continue each night until the corn disappears.

4. Onion

In a glass container, pour white vinegar over a slice of white onion. Leave the container in a warm place during the day, then cover the corn with the onion before you go to bed. Use a bandage or bandage tape to hold it in place while you sleep. If the corn is not soft enough to be removed in the morning, repeat the treatment nightly until it softens more.

5. Bread

Soak a half a slice of stale bread in apple cider vinegar and secure it to the affected part of your foot with adhesive tape. Wrap with plastic wrap and slip on a cotton sock. Your corn or callus should disappear by morning.

6. Castor Oil

For corns on toes, place a non-medicated, O-shaped corn pad around the corn. Use a cotton swab to dab a few drops of castor oil onto the corn, then cover with adhesive tape to keep it from moving. Wear old socks in case the castor oil leaks through.

7. Aspirin

Crush five or six uncoated aspirin tablets and mix with equal parts apple cider vinegar and water. Once you’ve added enough to form a paste, rub it onto a corn or callus, using a bandage to hold it in place. After at least 10 minutes, the bump should be loose enough to gently rub off with a pumice stone.

8. Epsom Salts

For calluses, toss a handful of Epsom salts into a basin of warm water, then soak feet for about 10 minutes. Once the dead skin has softened, use a callus file or pumice stone to rub off the top layers. Continue grind the callus down a bit each day after a bath or shower. It might take a few weeks, but trying to remove the whole thing at once will make the callus worse if you grind too deep.

