WHAT IS CUTICLE INFECTION?

Acute paronychia - This usually appears as a sudden, very painful area of swelling, warmth and redness
around a fingernail or toenail, usually after an injury to the area.

WHAT CAUSES CUTICLE INFECTION?

An acute paronychia typically is caused by an infection with bacteria that invade the skin where it
was injured.

REMEDY

1. Wash Your Hands

Wash your hands on a regular basis with antibacterial soap to avoid getting a nail infection. Doing this one simple thing makes sure that your nails are clean and that they make a terrible breeding ground for the infection. Keeping clean is the same as keeping healthy and there cannot be a better home remedy for nail infection.

2. Proper Nail Care

To prevent getting a nail infection in the first place you should not bite your nails or suck on your fingers. It may be hard to quit if you have been chewing on your nails for your whole life, then it may be hard to quit, but it’s for your own good.
To quit, try painting your nails or wearing false nails. You can also buy nail polish that tastes so disgusting that you won’t even want to bite your nails.

3. Wear Gloves When Cleaning

Another thing that you can do to prevent getting a nail infection is to wear rubber gloves when you clean with chemicals or use dish soap that is unkind to your nails and skin. There are some soaps that are specially designed to soften your skin.
Those types of soaps would be good choices. When you use chemicals to clean ALWAYS use rubber gloves. This can protect your skin and nails from damage.
Another thing that you can do to prevent getting a nail infection is to wear rubber gloves when you clean with chemicals

4. Soak Your Nails

If you already have a minor nail infection, then one easy natural home remedy is to just soak your infected nail. Fill a dish halfway with warm water and add your usual antibacterial soap. Soak your hand for fifteen minutes at a time, at least three to four times a day to see improvement.

5. Aloe Vera Gel

Aloe Vera is one of the best natural remedies used to kill fungus and bacteria. It is easily available everywhere and usually it doesn’t cost very much.
Simply put on enough gel to cover the infected area. The gel is usually scent-free, so it won’t be annoying to keep on. Apply the gel seven or eight times a day until your infection goes away.
Aloe Vera is great at killing fungus and bacteria.

6. Apple Cider Vinegar

Apple cider vinegar is a great natural cure at killing infections. The first thing that the vinegar will do is kill off the dead skin surrounding the nail. Sometimes when people’s nails are infected they start to grow extra layers, and this can help to get rid of them.
This may sting a bit if you bite your nails. Mix two parts of water with one part of vinegar (any type can be used, but apple cider vinegar is usually preferred). Soak your fingers in it for at least fifteen minutes. Do this everyday until the infection goes away.

7. Tea Tree & Coconut Oil

Another great way to kill the infection is to soak your fingers in tea tree oil. Note that it is dangerous to only use tea tree oil. It will burn your fingers if you do. It is recommended that you mix it with an equal part of coconut oil before you soak your fingers in it.
If you prefer, you can exchange the coconut oil with lavender oil. Soak your fingers for at least fifteen minutes (unless it starts to burn your skin before that). Repeat this every day until your infection goes away.

8. Yogurt

Plain yogurt is an excellent natural remedy as it contains good bacteria that can help your nail infection if it is caused by fungus. Apply the yogurt on and around the nail and let it sit for at least forty-five minutes.
When the time is up, rinse it off only with water. Do not use soap this time. Do this every day until your infection is gone.

9. Mustard Oil

Mustard oil is another great natural home remedy that can help kill away an infection, and it comes with the added bonus of moisturizing your fingers. Soak your fingers in the oil for at least fifteen minutes a day.
If you want, you can add lemon oil as well. If your finger comes out yellow, don’t worry. That happens sometimes. It’ll go away on its own soon enough.
Mustard oil is another great natural home remedy that can help kill away an infection

10. Lemon

Lemon makes for one of the best natural remedies and great cleaner. It can also help to brighten your nails. Apply lemon juice like you would with nail polish, but also add it around the nail.
When you do this, it gets rid of dead skin, cleans your nail, and moisturizes your skin. If you bite your nails is may sting if it gets into cuts. Do this every day until the infection goes away.
Hopefully these tricks can help you avoid a nail infection if you haven’t gotten one, and cure the one you have before it gets bad enough to see a doctor.