WHAT IS DANDRUFF?

Small piece of dead skin in person's hair.

WHAT CAUSES DANDRUFF?

People with dry skin tend to get dandruff more often. Winter cold air, combined with overheated rooms
is a common cause of itchy, flaking skin. People with dandruff caused by dry skin tend to have small
flakes of dandruff, the flakes are not oily. People with reborrheic dermatitis are very prone to
dandruff.

REMEDY

1. Coconut Oil & Lemon Massage

Coconut oil nourishes your hair, while lemon juice helps to treat dandruff at home without using harmful chemicals. Given below is the easiest dandruff home remedy:

Step 1: Heat 2 tablespoons of coconut oil and mix it with equal amounts of lemon juice.
Step 2: Massage your scalp gently with the mixture.
Step 3: Leave it on for 20 minutes before rinsing if off with shampoo.

2. Fenugreek Pack as a Dandruff Remedy

This home remedy for dandruff uses fenugreek seeds. Follow the instructions below to use fenugreek pack to cure dandruff:

Step 1: Soak some fenugreek or methi seeds in water overnight.
Step 2: Drain the leftover water and mash the softened seeds into a paste.
Step 3: Let the paste sit for about an hour.
Step 4: Rinse it off with a mild shampoo.

3. Curd

Treating dandruff at home with curd is a little messy but very effective. Method for using curd as a home remedy for dandruff is given below:

Step 1: Apply some curd to your hair and scalp.
Step 2: Let it sit tight for about an hour.
Step 3: Rinse it off with a shampoo that’s mild.

4. Baking Soda is a great home remedy for dandruff

Dandruff treatment can be carried out at home with baking soda as well. The remedy to use baking soda for dandruff treatment is given below:

Step 1: Wet your hair slightly.
Step 2: Keeping your hair wet, rub a spoonful of baking soda on your scalp.
Step 3: Leave it on for 60-90 seconds prior to washing it off.

5. Tea Tree Oil

Tea tree oil is another way to cure dandruff at home. Follow the instructions given below to treat dandruff at home easily:

Step 1: Pour a few drops of tea tree oil on your scalp and spread it evenly.
Step 2: Let it soak for 5 minutes.
Step 3: Wash it off with a mild shampoo.

6. Apple Cider Vinegar can be used too, to remedy dandruff at home

Treating dandruff and hair fall at home can be a bit tricky. Apple cider vinegar is one of the best home remedies for dandruff and hair fall. Learn how to treat dandruff with apple cider vinegar below:

Step 1: Mix equal parts of apple cider vinegar and water and set it aside.
Step 2: After a regular hair wash, apply the mixture on your wet hair.
Step 3: Massage your scalp well and leave it on for 15 minutes before rinsing it off.

7. Henna or Mehndi

Cure dandruff with this simple henna remedy. Henna softens your hair, while lemon juice works its wonder in dandruff treatment.

Step 1: Mix Henna or Mehndi with tea liquor, curd and a dash of lemon juice.
Step 2: Set this mixture aside for approximately 8 hours.
Step 3: Apply it on your scalp and hair.
Step 4: Leave it on for about 2 hours and then wash off thoroughly.

8. Neem Juice helps cure dandruff at home

Neem has anti-bacterial properties and is an amazing home remedy for dandruff. The method given below is easy and mess-free.

Step 1: Grind a bunch of neem leaves in a food processor to form a thick paste.
Step 2: Apply this paste on your scalp and let it sit for 10 minutes or so.
Step 3: Wash it off with water.

9. Multani Mitti Hair Pack

Multani mitti helps to restore hair health. This simple dandruff remedy using multani mitti gives you soft, silky hair and dandruff-free hair.

Step 1: Make a thick paste using multani mitti, water and a dash of lemon juice.
Step 2: Apply this mixture on your hair and scalp and leave it on for about 20 minutes
Step 3: Rinse it off with water.

10. Orange Peel Pack works well as a homely dandruff treatment

Orange peel is another dandruff remedy that can be tried at home. Read how to use orange peel pack for dandruff removal below:

Step 1: Throw an orange peel in a food processor and squeeze in some lemon juice too.
Step 2: Grind all the ingredients into a paste.
Step 3: Apply this paste on your scalp and let it sit for 30 minutes before washing it off with a mild shampoo.

Remember, all these remedies need to be applied at least thrice a week for best results; continue to do so till you see the difference. Aren’t you happy that you’re now empowered to do your own dandruff treatment at home?
