WHAT ARE HEAD LICE?

Are wingless insects spending their entire life on human scalp and feeding exclusively on human blood.

WHAT CAUSES HEAD LICE?

Head lice are contagious. You can get head lice through:
-Touching your head to an infected person's head.
-Sharing the personal items (like comb) of someone with head lice.
-Using a fabric item after an infected person.

REMEDY

1. Garlic

The strong fragrance of garlic can suffocate lice, ultimately killing them.

Grind eight to 10 garlic cloves into a paste and mix in two to three teaspoons of lime juice. Apply the mixture thoroughly onto the scalp. Leave it on for a half an hour and then rinse the hair thoroughly with hot water.
Alternatively, you can make a thick paste by combining fresh garlic juice with some cooking oil, lemon extract, green tea and some shampoo and conditioner. Coat the hair thoroughly with the paste and cover your scalp with a towel or shower cap for about a half an hour. Then wash your hair with your regular shampoo. Repeat this remedy on a weekly basis for one to two months.

2. Baby Oil

For another easy natural treatment for head lice, you will need baby oil, laundry detergent and some white vinegar. It is believed that baby oil, too, helps suffocate the head lice.

Apply some baby oil on your hair and then comb your hair slowly so that lice start falling from your head.
Then wash your hair with laundry detergent and hot water.
Before bed, put some white vinegar on your hair and cover your head with a shower cap or towel. Leave it on overnight.
In the morning, wash your hair with regular shampoo and then apply some conditioner.
Repeat this process for at least three to four days to get positive results.

3. Olive Oil

Olive oil will effectively smother and kill head lice.

Apply any type of olive oil to your hair generously before going to bed. Put a shower cap or towel on your head to keep the oil on your hair overnight. In the morning, comb out the tiny parasites and then wash your hair with some herbal shampoo containing tea tree oil.
Another option is to mix one-half cup of olive oil with one-half cup of conditioner and add some liquid soap to it. Apply this solution onto your hair and leave it on for an hour. Then, rinse out your hair and apply conditioner. Comb your hair thoroughly to remove the dead lice. Repeat this remedy again after a week to get best results.

4. Salt

Salt can also be used to eradicate head lice through desiccation.

Mix one-quarter cup of salt and one-quarter cup of vinegar thoroughly.
Gently spray the solution onto your hair so that it becomes slightly wet. Put on a shower cap and leave it for about two hours.
Then wash and condition your hair.
Repeat this every three days to get positive results.

5. Petroleum Jelly

Petroleum jelly can have a stifling effect on roaming lice.

Apply a thick layer of petroleum jelly to the scalp before going to bed.
Cover your head tightly with a shower cap or towel. Leave it on overnight.
In the morning, use baby oil to remove the petroleum jelly.
Comb your hair thoroughly to remove the lice.
Repeat this several nights in a row.

6. Tree Tea Oil

Tea tree essential oil is a natural insecticide, making it an effective treatment for head lice.

Mix together one teaspoon of tea tree oil, one ounce of natural shampoo and three tablespoons of coconut or olive oil.
Apply the solution gently throughout your hair and cover your head with a shower cap or towel. Leave your head covered for a half an hour and then rinse thoroughly with hot water.
Finally, comb through your hair while it is still wet to remove the dead lice.
Note: Do not apply tea tree oil directly to the scalp.

7. Coconut Oil

The lubricating nature of coconut oil will stop lice from moving around freely, preventing it from multiplying.

First, rinse your hair thoroughly with apple cider vinegar and allow it to dry.
Then completely saturate the hair and scalp with coconut oil. Cover your head with a shower cap or towel and leave it on for six to eight hours or overnight.
In the morning, comb your hair and then shampoo as usual.
Repeat this every day for a week to eradicate lice. To make the treatment more effective, add several drops of anise essential oil to the coconut oil prior to application.

8. White Vinegar

Another safe and inexpensive method for eliminating head lice is white vinegar. White vinegar possesses acetic acid, which can destroy lice.

Dilute white vinegar with an equal amount of water.
Saturate the hair and scalp with the solution and then wrap a towel around the hair for about an hour or two.
Next dip a comb in white vinegar and comb your hair, focusing on one small section of hair at a time.
You can also rinse your hair with white vinegar before and after shampooing.

9. Sesame Seed Oil

High in antibacterial, antifungal and natural insecticide properties, sesame seed oil can also be used to solve the problem of head lice.

Mix together one-fourth cup of sesame seed oil, one-eighth cup of neem oil, one teaspoon of tea tree oil, one-half teaspoon of eucalyptus and rosemary essential oils, and about 10 drops of lavender essential oil.
Rinse your hair with apple cider vinegar and allow it to dry.
Apply the oil solution to the hair and scalp, cover with a shower cap or towel and leave it on overnight.
In the morning, comb your hair thoroughly to remove the dead lice. Then shampoo normally.
Repeat this treatment daily for one or two weeks.

10. Mayonnaise

Mayonnaise contains a lot of oil, which has viscosity properties that will suffocate live head lice.

Apply full-fat mayonnaise liberally over your scalp.
Cover your hair with a shower cap or towel and leave it on for about eight hours or overnight.
Shampoo and then comb any remaining lice out of your hair.
Repeat this daily for one week.

You need to be patient and diligent using these remedies to get rid of the problem of head lice completely.