WHAT IS MORNING SICKNESS?

Nausea in pregnancy, typically occurring in the first few months. Despite its name, the nausea can
affect pregnant women at any time of day.

WHAT CAUSES MORNING SICKNESS?

Causes of morning sickness. There is no one cause of morning sickness during pregnancy, and severity
varies among women. Increased hormone levels during the first few weeks of pregnancy is among the most
common causes. Reduced blood sugar is another common cause of morning sickness.

REMEDY

1. Vitamin B-6, taken as 25 mg every 8 hours, has been shown to have a significant effect in reducing or stopping nausea and vomiting.

2. Increase B-complex vitamins and iron intake. (Use a food based B-complex like Rainbow Light, and for iron I love the Floridex Liquid Iron Formula. It's all food-based and non constipating ... good to take extra through entire pregnancy.)

3. Take zinc supplements, 25 mg per day

4. Get some brewer's yeast. It's high in B vitamins, and good sprinkled on grains such as brown rice.

5. Sip on some raspberry leaf, peppermint, or anise tea.

6. Cut or grate some ginger root and pour hot water over it, then drink as a tea.

7. Take ginger root in capsule form.

8. Drink flat, room temperature ginger brew or gingerale.

9. Chew on crystallized ginger.

10. Eat some ginger chews.

11. Take homeopathic tablets: Nux vomica 6X or ipecac 30x.

12. Make your own belly rub! Use 1 drop of peppermint oil to 3 drops camomile oil. Peppermint oil is stimulating so a little goes a long way ... Place on a warm, damp towel, and rub your belly.

13. Eat a protein-rich snack before bed.

14. Go for a walk or enjoy some mild exercise to relieve hormonal activity.

15. Keep a box of crackers by your bed and eat a few before getting out of bed in the morning.

16. Avoid spicy, fried, rich, fatty, and greasy foods. Also avoid any caffeine or artificial sweeteners.

17. Get out of bed slowly.

18. Get plenty of fresh air.

19. Suck on 1 drop of peppermint oil on a sugar cube. (Or drop the entire sugar/oil concoction into your tea.)

20. Keep apple juice by the bed and sip thru the night. This will help keep blood sugar stable.

21. Wear motion sickness wrist bands everywhere you go.

22. Get some Rescue Remedy from Bach Flower Remedies. This is an over-the-counter flower essence. (Note: it does have a tiny bit of alcohol.) You can put a few drops under your tongue, or place on your wrists. (To find the sweet spot on your wrist, measure 3 fingers up from wrist, palm-side of hand up. There, you'll feel a small dent ... Place there and push slightly for a 10 counts acupressure point for nausea. Or you can put a few drops on a warm, damp towel or rub a few drops on your belly.

23. Eat 5 to 6 small, frequent meals every few hours throughout the day. Make sure to have a balance of carbs and protein to maintain blood sugar.

24. Suck on lemon drops.

25. Drink brewer's yeast and tomato juice with lemon.

26. Try to get a lot of rest! Being over tired makes morning sickness worse.

27. Drink lemonade.

28. Get acupuncture treatments. These have been really helpful in treating some of my clients' morning sickness.

29. Chew on fennel seeds.

30. Stay hydrated. If water won't stay down, try frozen natural juice popsicles.
