WHAT CAUSES NATURAL HAIR LOSS?

Stress, illness, and child birth can cause temporary hair loss. Ringworm caused by a fungal infection
can also cause hair loss. ... Autoimmune disease may cause alopecia areata. In alopecia areata, the
immune system revs up for unknown reasons and affects the hair follicles.

REMEDY

1. Eggs

Regular protein treatment is essential to enjoy stronger and thicker hair. For a protein hair treatment, the best ingredient is eggs.

Take one or two eggs, depending on the length of your hair, and beat it properly. Apply the egg on wet hair and allow it to sit for about 30 minutes. Wash your hair with lukewarm water and shampoo. You can use this protein treatment once or twice a week.
Another option is to mix together one egg yolk, one tablespoon of a hair oil of your choice and two tablespoons of water. Use this mixture to massage your scalp thoroughly. Follow this remedy once a week to enjoy thicker hair.

2. Olive Oil

Olive oil will also add body to your hair. Plus, it will help soften and strengthen your tresses.

Massage your hair and scalp with warm olive oil and leave it on for at least 30 to 45 minutes. Rinse it out thoroughly and wash your hair using a mild shampoo. You can also leave the oil on your hair overnight and then shampoo your hair the next morning.
Another option is to mix olive oil with some honey and apply the mixture on your hair. Leave it on for at least 30 minutes and then wash your hair.
Use either or these remedies once or twice a week.

3. Avocado

Avocado can also be used to get thicker hair as it moisturizes and adds body to your hair. Plus, the vitamin E in this fruit contributes to the overall health of the hair shaft.

Make a mixture of one mashed avocado, one mashed banana and one tablespoon of olive oil. Massage it on your scalp and leave the mixture on your hair for about 30 minutes so that the nutrients are absorbed by the scalp. Finally, rinse it out and shampoo your hair.
You can also make a hydrating hair mask by mixing two tablespoons of wheatgerm oil with half of a ripe mashed avocado. Apply this hair mask on freshly shampooed hair and allow it to sit for at least 20 minutes. Rinse your hair thoroughly and then shampoo your hair.
Use either of these avocado hair masks once a week.

4. Fenugreek Seeds

Fenugreek seeds can also be used to prevent hair loss and enjoy better hair growth.

Soak two to three tablespoons of fenugreek seeds in water for eight to 10 hours. Grind the soaked seeds to make a fine paste. You can also mix two teaspoons of coconut milk in it. Apply the paste on your hair and scalp and allow it to sit for about 30 minutes before washing your hair with lukewarm water. When done weekly on a regular basis, this remedy will prevent dry scalp and help you enjoy thicker hair.
Another option is to use the water that the fenugreek seeds soaked in overnight as a hair rinse. This will encourage hair growth and help you to get rid of dandruff. Use it once or twice a week.

5. Indian Gooseberry

The anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antibacterial and exfoliating properties present in Indian gooseberry can help a lot in maintaining a healthy scalp and better hair growth rate.

Mix one tablespoon of Indian gooseberry or amla powder in two tablespoons of coconut oil and heat until boiling. Strain the oil and massage it onto your scalp before going to bed. The next morning, shampoo your hair as usual. Do this on a weekly basis.
Another option is to mix one-quarter cup of warm water in one-half cup of Indian gooseberry powder and let it sit for about 10 minutes. Apply the paste on your hair and leave it on for 15 to 20 minutes before rinsing it off. Do not shampoo your hair for a few hours. Follow this remedy every few weeks.
You can also take the Indian gooseberry fruit and its extract as a dietary supplement for healthy hair.

6. Castor Oil

Massaging your scalp regularly with cold-pressed castor oil is one of the easiest ways to get thicker hair naturally. Due to its high viscosity, it coats the hair thoroughly and protects against hair fall. Plus, being high in vitamin E and fatty acids, it promote hair growth.

Heat a mixture of equal parts of castor oil and coconut oil. Simply using castor oil will also work but it tends to be too thick.
Apply it on your head and scalp and massage in circular motions.
Comb your hair to distribute the oil throughout your hair and remove tangles.
Cover your hair with a towel moistened with warm water.
Leave it on for at least one hour and then shampoo your hair as usual.
Follow this remedy once a week to enjoy lustrous and thick hair.

7. Aloe Vera

Another very popular ingredient that can be used to enjoy thicker hair is aloe vera, thanks to its moisturizing quality. It will also help restore the pH balance of the scalp.

Extract the gel from one or two aloe vera leaves and rub the gel onto your scalp. Allow it to sit for 30 minutes before rinsing your hair with lukewarm water. Do this once once or twice a week on a regular basis.
Another option is mix two teaspoons of coconut milk in fresh aloe vera gel and apply it to your scalp. Leave it on for about half an hour before rinsing it off and shampooing your hair. Repeat once or twice a week.
You can also consume one tablespoon of aloe vera juice daily on an empty stomach to enjoy better hair growth and overall health.

8. Henna Leaves

Another easy way to get thicker hair naturally is to apply henna. Henna leaves will give your hair a rich natural color and make it thicker, softer and less prone to breakage .

Grind a handful of fresh henna leaves with a little water to make a fine paste. Let it sit for two hours and then apply it to your hair. Cover your hair with a shower cap. After a few hours, wash your hair thoroughly and shampoo your hair.
Another option is to mix sufficient water in henna powder to make a paste with a yogurt-like consistency. Instead of plain water, you can also use green tea for better conditioning. Keep the henna paste aside overnight. The next day, add one raw egg and two teaspoons of lemon juice to this mixture. Apply it to your hair and leave it on until it dries completely. Finally, wash it off and shampoo your hair.
Note: Make sure to wear your gloves when using henna and apply the paste using a hair brush to avoid staining.

9. Flaxseed

Being rich in omega 3 fatty acids and protein, flaxseed can also help in promoting thicker naturally.

Soak one-quarter cup of flaxseeds in water overnight. The next morning, boil the flaxseeds in two cups of water over high heat while stirring occasionally. When the thickens to a consistency of foamy jelly then turn off the heat and strain the gel. You can also add a few drops of an essential oil to it. Allow it to cool and then use it as a hair gel. This flaxseed gel is particularly good for those with curly or wavy hair.
Even eating freshly ground flaxseeds can help promote shiny and thicker hair. You can also take flaxseed oil.

10. Healthy Diet

A healthy diet rich in protein and various vitamins and minerals is an essential prerequisite for healthy and thicker hair. Protein and B vitamins, in particular, promote thicker and longer hair.

So, include more milk, eggs, Greek yogurt (has more protein than the regular yogurt), poultry, fatty fish, beans, legumes, nuts, seeds, whole grains, and fresh green vegetables in your diet.