WHAT IS STRESS?

A state of mental or emotional strain or tension resulting from adverse or very demanding circumstances.

WHAT CAUSES STRESS?

The situations and pressures that cause stress are known as stressors. We usually think of stressors
as being negative, such as an exhausting work schedule or a rocky relationship. However, anything that
puts high demands on you can be stressful. ... Of course, not all stress is caused by external factors.

REMEDY

1. Slow and Deep Breathing

Slow and deep breathing can help you cool off in a stressful situation. With deep breathing, more oxygen enters the body, which has a calming effect on your mind and body. In fact, 15 to 30 minutes of slow, deep breathing daily can help prevent stress. It can even help you think more clearly, so that you can deal with stress more easily.
When you are under stress, sit or lie down in a quiet, comfortable place.
Close your eyes and take a deep breath through your nose to the count of 5.
Hold your breath for 5 counts, then exhale for 5 counts.
Repeat 5 or 6 more times or until you calm down and feel relaxed.

2. Epsom Salt

Epsom salt is another useful and effective remedy to help you calm down when you are under stress. Stress causes low magnesium levels in the body and increases adrenaline levels.
Epsom salt is high in magnesium, which helps increase the mood-elevating serotonin chemical in the brain. This in turn helps reduce stress, promote relaxation and ease anxiety, irritability, insomnia and abnormal heart rhythms.

Add 1 cup of Epsom salt and a few drops of an aromatic essential oil of your choice to warm bathwater.
Stir thoroughly, until the salt granules dissolve in the water.
Soak in this soothing water for 20 minutes.
You can enjoy this soothing bath 2 or 3 times a week.

3. Chamomile Tea

Chamomile is an effective herb for reducing stress. Its calming and soothing nature has a sedative effect on the central nervous system. It helps relax the muscles, ease anxiety and promote better sleep.

You can drink up to 4 cups of chamomile tea a day to fight stress. To make the tea, add 2 teaspoons of dried chamomile to a cup of hot water. Cover and steep for 10 minutes. Strain, add raw honey as per taste and drink it.
You can also add fresh chamomile flowers or a few drops of chamomile essential oil to warm bathwater for a nerve-soothing soak.
You can even take this herb in supplement form. Consult your doctor for proper dosage.

4. Massage

Body massage also works as a stress reliever for many. According to traditional Chinese medicine, massage helps open blocked energy channels to reduce stress and improve overall health.
A warm oil massage of the feet, hands, back and head helps relax tense muscles, improve circulation and fight anxiety.
For a relaxing massage, you can use sesame, olive or coconut oil.

Slightly warm the oil of your choice.
Use the warm oil to massage your forehead, neck, shoulders, back and bottom of your feet.
Then, take a warm bath.
Massage your body daily or as needed to reduce stress.

5. Ashwagandha

Ashwagandha, also known as Indian ginseng or Withania somnifera, is an effective herb for stress.
A 2012 study published in the Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine found that ashwagandha root is effective in reducing stress and anxiety in adults by lowering levels of cortisol, the stress hormone. It also improves resistance to stress, which in turn improves the quality of life.
In addition, ashwagandha strengthens the nervous system, boosts energy, fights fatigue and improves the quality of sleep.
This herb is readily available in the market in fresh root, dried root, powdered or supplement form. The recommended dose is 1 to 2 grams of the fresh or dried root boiled in 1 cup of milk or water, 3 times daily. If taking a supplement, consult your doctor first.

Note: Pregnant women and young children should not take this herb.

6. Holy Basil

Holy basil is another cherished Ayurvedic herb that works as a natural anti-stress agent. Being an adaptogenic herb, it enhances the body’s natural response to physical and emotional stress. Plus, it helps the body function properly during times of stress.
According to a 2006 study published in the Journal of Ethnopharmacology, holy basil protects against chronic restraint stress-induced changes, through its central effect.

Chew 10 to 12 fresh holy basil leaves twice daily.
You can even drink a cup of basil tea to reduce stress. To make the tea, put 1 tablespoon of fresh basil leaves in a cup of boiling water. Cover and steep for 5 minutes. Strain, add some raw honey and sip the tea slowly.

7. Green Tea

You can also sip away your stress with a cup of green tea. Green tea contains L-Theanine, an amino acid that promotes the production of alpha brain waves, which in turn reduce stress, encourage relaxation and improve focus and mental alertness.
In addition, this amino acid plays an important role in the development of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), a neurotransmitter that promotes relaxation.

Add 2 teaspoons of green tea leaves to a cup of hot water.
Cover and steep for 5 minutes.
Strain and add some fresh lemon juice and raw honey.
You can drink 2 to 3 cups of green tea a day to reduce stress.

8. Passionflower

Another effective folk remedy for stress is passionflower. Passionflower can increase GABA levels in the brain, which helps reduce stress as well as anxiety and panic attacks.

Drink a cup of passionflower tea to reduce stress. To make the tea, add 1 tablespoon of the dried herb to 1 cup of hot water. Cover and steep for about 10 minutes. Strain and drink this tea while it is still warm.
Passionflower is also available in liquid extract, tincture and tablet forms. Always consult your doctor before taking a supplement as it may interact with certain medications.
Note: Small children and women who are pregnant or nursing must not take this herb.

9. Exercise

Exercise works as a great stress reliever, be it aerobic, moderate-intensity or high-intensity exercise. It helps reduce the stress hormones and increase the “feel good” hormones in your body. In addition, it improves your mood and distracts you from daily worries.
Try to make time to do some kind of exercise when you are under stress. You can just take a short walk, swim, dance or play some sports.
You can also practice yoga to fight stress. Yoga works as a meditation, which helps calm both your mind and body. It also improves your focus and helps you remain calm and clear in everything you do.

10. B Vitamins

To prevent stress and improve your mood, start taking B vitamins. The eight B vitamins — B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, B7, B9 and B12 —promote proper functioning of the brain and nervous system, as well as help promote relaxation and fight stress and fatigue.
In fact, B vitamin deficiency in the body can cause irritability, depression and apathy. So, when you are under stress, eat more foods rich in B vitamins.

Foods high in B vitamins include whole grains, beans, peas, peanuts, spinach, kale, blackstrap molasses, avocados, potatoes, bananas, legumes, eggs and dairy products.
You can also take B vitamin supplements. Consult a doctor first to find out what type of B vitamin your body needs.
Additional Tips

Try to keep things organized to enjoy peace of mind and a sense of control over your life.
Limit your Internet and phone use so that you can spend more time with your family and friends.
Get proper sleep. Sleep is a natural stress reducer.
Enjoy a walk for 30 minutes, 5 times a week.
Limit your consumption of alcohol, caffeine and sugar.
Eat healthy foods like whole grains and protein to improve your mood and fight stress.
Include more vitamin C foods in your diet. Vitamin C helps bring stress hormone levels back to normal.
If you smoke, quit smoking.
Listen to soothing music when you are under stress. Music can be soothing for your mind.
Aromatherapy can also provide relief from stress by improving your mood, reducing anxiety and aiding focus and concentration.
Take up a calming hobby like knitting, working on puzzles, reading or singing to keep your life stress-free.
